---
title: "Do we worship God or does God watch us worship ourselves?"
description: "The hierarchies and our relationship with what we might call God."
draft: false
toc: true
tags: ["Criticism", "Politics"]
categories: ["Anthroposophy"]
image: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5b/Michelangelo_-_Creation_of_Adam_%28cropped%29.jpg
---

Today my intention is to briefly describe the hierarchies as they are related to God and worship. To begin with, what is God? God is the absolute totality. This includes both the physical world and the “higher” world, which some may call ideal, or the spiritual. For the purposes of today, we shall call this “higher” world the spiritual. Often times, these two worlds are conceived of differently, as antinomies held apart, but connected by something higher. That conception is quite wrong, they are already unified. If they weren’t, the classically defined conception of God would make no sense, nor would its usage in written testimony. Thus, God is the ultimate source from which all being and differentiation emanates. The true “One God” of authentic monotheism points us here, but the human mind can only approach it through manifestations, including the contours of its logical necessity. Within this “oneness”, we may re-introduce spirit, or the spiritual world, as the animating, formative force by which God interacts with the world. Important to our understanding is the etymological foundation of the word. Spirit derives from the Latin *spiritus*, meaning “breath, breathing, life”, etc. This itself comes from *spirare*, “to breath”, which connects to the Greek *pneuma*(πνεῦμα), also meaning breath, the Greek *psykhē* (ψυχή), meaning breath, the Sanskrit *ātman*, also meaning breath. Worth noting is the Hebrew word *ruach*, literally meaning “wind”, but translated as “the spirit”, and various other words that draw this same allusion! So what’s the deal with the breath allusion? Well, it’s certainly not incidental or accidental in any way. Breath is the invisible force that animates the living being. It is the immediate experience of the vital principle entering from within, sustaining life from within, and then returning without. There is modern day word play here with the phrase “catching one’s breath”. The phrase suggests a possession where it is *your* breath, while “catching” it, is like catching the wind. It’s never truly yours, nor do you manufacture or command your breath. You receive or synchronize yourself with it. 

Just an aside, “God” also has a funny etymology, being obscure and debated. Current theories connect it Proto-Indo-European roots *ǵʰutós (invoked), from *ǵʰew- (to call, to invoke), which suggests to one the title: “that which is invoked”. Unlike spirit, which describes a very experiential force, “God” is a title whose origin points to a ritual action and invocation, which implies a kind of alienation. When naming “God” without concretely knowing *what* we are naming, we don’t exactly know what we are invoking. This will subsequently be proved. 

Spirit, on the other hand, is very concretely known by man as an activity that he himself comes into contact with and is constituted by. If not by the ideal principles of the physical body, then man comes to know spirit by the very *breath* of nature, spiritual beings whose exhalation appears to us as crystal formation, plant growth, and flowing stream of a river, providing us with an understanding of matter and physicality as the condensed “breath” of spirit. Of course, the crystal as an object is not a spirit, but the formative activity that produces the crystal is spiritual (named as an elemental). In this way, the physical world and the spiritual world have this sort of relationship. 

We have, before us, an adequate definition of “spirit”. Spirit is *self-generating activity*. Likewise, its qualities, it’s intelligence, scope, and power, are delineated by the *level* from which it generates itself. Consider it a spectrum of creative power. God *is* this creative power, but there are qualitative distinctions between, say, the spirit flowing in a river, and the spirit in human genius. Both are definitely self-generating activities, but of vastly different orders. These different orders are called the hierarchies; they are the graduated, intelligent levels of this unitary power. Consequently, “Spirit” becomes concretely understood as a domain of hierarchies constituting the spiritual world. To speak of “spirit” is to speak of this totality as a structured continuum of creative beings. On the other hand, to deny the hierarchies is to deny the observable, graded complexity of creative activity in the universe, reducing it either to some vague monism (God), or blind materialism (which is also God, but this God is called “chance”). 

Barring those latter two reductions, when people speak vaguely of “God”, they are usually unknowingly referring to one of the lower levels of this hierarchy. Rightfully, they grasp a self-generating activity in both the physical world and the spiritual, but they wrongfully attribute God to some lower order of power. Before us are a few various relevant hierarchical members of which they may refer: The “I”, or human ego, is the individual human spirit, developed since the last death (if you haven’t accepted reincarnation as a fact of life already, you might need another few incarnations to get caught up to speed). In modern discourse, it is often unconsciously deified. Angeloi, or angels, are beings of the hierarchy immediately above the human “I”. Each human has a specific angel as a guide and protector. This is the spiritual entity most accessible to the modern individual’s consciousness. When changing course in life abruptly and having this change result in avoiding this or that accident, you can thank your guardian angel. Archangeloi, or archangels, are beings of a higher hierarchy who govern the collective impulses, spirits (or breaths) of an epoch, and larger cultural streams. Relating them is beyond the scope of discussion. There are other spiritual beings which constitute the “hierarchies”, but the ones stated are the most relevant for now. 

The main point to convey today is that true spiritual progress is not achieved by leaping to an abstract “One God”. It involves an intentional concrete ascension through the knowledge of and relationship with these hierarchical beings, starting with the recognition of one’s own “I”, and its guardian angel. Modern professed monotheism can be considered a form of spiritual egoism, where under the name “God”, we either worship our own reflected self (the “I”), or our personalized spiritual servant (the Angel). The Maya by which this is accomplished is the very vagueness of the word “God”. When spirituality becomes a search for “God”, defined solely as that which validates my inner subjectivity and affirms my chosen paths, or sensibilities, we have entered a realm of self-worship. It is the worship of the self reflected by itself. This egoistic religious confession manifests itself via two core misattributing. The first is the sanctification of personal intuition and intellectual judgment. The Individual’s subjectivity, that sense of “what feels true to me is elevated to infallibility. The second finds the self as the sovereign concern. God is recast as a divine servant of personal destiny. The spiritual world (usually one’s Guardian Angel) so reduced to “the help” is commanded to bless the subject’s plans and ensure comfort. Prayer here becomes a negotiation for personal success, and how *divine* something is, is measured by its alignment with the subject’s will and subjective sense of well-being. 

Modern religious consciousness inherits these problems. By confusing the universal with the personal, everyone’s “God” is ultimately their own “I”, or their personal angel, and shared spiritual truth and unity become an impossibility. Community begins to fracture into the collective of sovereign “I’s”, each with their own “truths”, leading to a pluralism of solipsisms. Growth is swiftly evaded. After all, an egoistic god never disagrees. They never demand change, or pulls us beyond our comfort zone, whether physically, or spiritually. The concrete cosmos- that world of hierarchies, elemental intelligences, cosmic purposes, and divine plans is dissolved into a fiery mist. Finally, that self-generating activity of spirit meets with the sovereign “I” resulting in a world of endless unmediated divine wills, inevitably running into conflict. Such a worldview is one of impotent chaos. 

The decline of religious institutions, and the co-opting of them by evangelical mega-churches and opportunists, is not a coincidence. They are, in a sense, necessary products of humanity’s current stage of development. The task of this age demands that we experience our “I” in its full isolated subjectivity. It urges us to grasp our own freedom and individuality as an imperative for the evolution of spirit. Our own inner authority must be called on and set straight, otherwise the contraction-into-self found in the attitudes of “my God = my sovereignty/feelings” or the mischaracterization of God as an abstract being will lead us into ruin. 

The “I” is beginning to experience the depth of its own interiority. These modern attitudes are thus the unconscious spiritual expressions of our current stage of development. The experience of interiority by the “I” intuitively feels the divinity which generated it, and in its immaturity proclaims itself a mighty oak, rather than recognizing itself as a seedling. We must ask ourselves in our daily rituals and practices: what are we actually worshiping?
