---
title: "Time Travel is a Christian Prospect"
description: "A consideration of time travel."
draft: false
toc: true
tags: ["Steiner", "Criticism", "Nature"]
categories: ["Anthroposophy", "Philosophy"]
image: https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/1*TcMn2fBFZLBSv6Wbj76UpA.jpeg
---
## Intro
When “time travel” is mentioned, the snarky retort of “we *are* travelling through time” often follows. What is meant by this is that by the very concept of being *in* time means that we are subject to the flow of time; to the power of Kronos. To state this only is to state the obvious. Of course when a prisoner travels from his cell to the yard, no one calls him a “traveler”. Yet he travels. Mere subjection to time, that fact of endurance in nature, is not what one means when time travel is evoked. The kind of time travel that sparks our imagination, the kind that carries spiritual significance and weight, is a question about *agency*, the degree to which one can step outside the determinations of nature, move or rebel against it, or perceive what lies beyond its power. Insofar as time travel exists, it must be of this latter sort, closely occupied with the question of freedom and agency. The aim here is to demonstrate what time travel *actually* is and its possibility. 

To get a better grasp of what is meant, we may look to examples in fiction. When popular culture imagines time travel, it tends to reach for a very mechanical sense of the process, say the flux capacitor in the DeLorean, or the “bigger on the inside” spatially of the Tardis. The assumption shared by these icons is that time is another spatial dimension one can navigate with the right machine, a mechanical solution to a mechanical setting. One simply points a machine in the right “temporal direction” and moves. The appeal here is the promise of change without really doing anything. You *remain* yourself, only relocated to 1955, or the dawn of the universe. However, this materialist fantasy fails in that it mistakes the mere function of displacement in time for freedom, assuming that agency over time is a matter of engineering instead of a metaphysical endeavor. The machine does not change *who* you are, only changing where and when you are. Similarly to the prisoner, he may walk to the guard’s desk, the yard, to his cell, or to the cafeteria, but he remains a prisoner. 

A more clever exploration of temporal agency appears in H. G. Wells’ *The Time Machine*. In this story, the Time Traveler constructs a framework for asking what time travel means and implies for man. His machine is quite selective and purposeful, but the story’s point is concerned with what one finds at the journey’s end. The traveler arrives in the year 802,701 to discover a humanity bifurcated into the Eloi and the Morlocks, as a projection of Wells’ anxiety about class division and the implications of the industrial revolution. *His* agency in time refuses the cheap “theme park-ification” of the past, opting for the revelation that *time itself* carries consequences. What Wells captures, among other themes and truths, is a thing which the materialist obscures in the form of a red herring. Genuine agency as related to time is never about locomotion, but about *relation*, something more ideal. Relation to the past, the future, and eternal *now*, and to the structures of power that would either reduce us to unfree beings, or become conducive to our budding sense of freedom. To understand time travel, we must first clear up what time *is*. The materialist treats time as a kind of neutral container, an additional fourth dimension alongside the three of space, assuming that space and time are commensurable. In other words, that the same logic governing extension in space governs the indifferent succession of time. It does not. Space, in its *indifferent* differentiation to point, line, and plane, presents us with a manifold where every dimension can substitute for another without altering the whole. Time, by contrast, has a for-itself difference. Its moments are *not* interchangeable in the same way. This may help to explain the resulting paradoxes, such as the “grandfather paradox”, and contradictions which result in this kind of conception. A deeper consideration reveals to us that time as we experience it with waking consciousness is *not* a true spiritual reality, it is a material one, and thus a perspectival image, a Maya which serves its purpose. Just as we instinctively transpose three-dimensional space onto a two-dimensional surface and learn to read perspective in space, so too must we learn to see the perspective in time, that is, to place every being at its correct point in time, recognizing that what appears causally sequentially in the present may, in truth, be the working of spiritual forces. Time itself, far from being a neutral dimension, originates in the collaboration of the spiritual hierarchies. It came into being through the sacrificial deed of higher spirits, giving birth to the spirits (or concept) of time known as Archai. To speak of time travel is not to speak of navigating a spatialized fourth dimension. It involves relating consciously to the spiritual substance of time itself, particularly to the Time-Spirits who construct and guide the epochs, and to the Father’s power which underlies all nature as its eternal ground. 

## What time is it?
If we are to speak of time travel, we must first dispense the notion mentioned that time is a neutral contained. Time is *not* space. The moments of time do not coexist. They negate one another. The past is not, yet it was, the future is not, yet it will be, and the present is the only vanishing point between the two. The essence of time is negativity posited for itself, the “negative unity of being outside of itself”. It is, in Hegel’s formulation, the Kronos who gives birth to everything and destroys his offspring. This is the Kronos of ancient myth; the devouring father and the power that *generates* only to consume, it is that inexorable force which subordinates everything finite to its own transience. Kronos is the abstract negativity that underlies all temporal existence. What spiritual science adds to this picture is the recognition that this abstract negativity (rather, time as we experience it in waking consciousness) is not a given. It was created for a purpose. Time came into being through the work of spiritual beings who structure and order the conditions of succession and casualty. In effect, time is *for* spirit. 

The Kronos of the philosopher successfully achieves the appearance of time within the sphere of nature. It is really the power of the Father, insofar as the Father is encountered as abstract law. The power that determines figurations as regular and establishes the relationships that science seeks to know is the work of the Father. But this is the Father in His exterior aspect. That power that holds nature in its lawful order, the Kronos who binds all things to the cycle of generation and decay. Yet time *itself* is not merely this devouring power. The concept of time *is* eternal. As Hegel himself says, “for it is neither just any time, nor the moment now, but time as time is its concept”, and this concept, in its self-identity is absolute negativity and freedom. Spiritual science gives the insight which Absolute Idealism provides a concrete spiritual content. The Archai, that is the Time-Spirits, are the true ancient time as the children of the Cherubim and Thrones. Time is the *activity* of these beings. The abstract Kronos which appears to us as the relentless flow of moments is the externalized image of the spiritual process constituted by the sacrificial giving and receiving which constitutes the cosmic order.

What this means for our inquiry is that time is truthfully a medium of relationship between the hierarchies, particularly between the Father and creation, and ultimately between the human soul and the eternal. Divisions of past, present, and future are certainly real, in a perspectival, relative sense (not to be confused with the “relativity” of Einstein, which no son or daughter of mine will support). They are forms through which we, in our state of separation from the spiritual world, experience the operations of beings who themselves dwell in a more unified relationship to time (or the time-spirits).

The question of time travel asks of man through spiritual means to relate to time as the time-spirits do. Can one learn to place every being at its correct point in time (in effect, *thinking* as the Time-Spirits do), while recognizing that on a higher register, linear succession is an assistant? To do this, we must then venture forth from what time is to its higher ideality in how it actually *works* as a field of spiritual agency. 

## Father time and the spirits
The reign of Kronos, the Titan of linear implacable time, is our subjection to the generation and decay of nature. Much can be said on the significance of Zeus slaying him and taking up the filled slot of *Father*. On the other hand, we have the qualitative reality of time as the workings of spiritual beings. They construct the epochs and hold open the possibility of development, redemption, history, and so on. These two powers are not identical, but are closely related, for both find their ultimate ground in the Father, whose nature is the substance of time itself. Everything in nature is subject to time, everything in time is subject to the Father. It’s almost a trope how mystics and those with experiential knowledge of spiritual worlds speak of the invalidity of spatio-temporality as we know it. For example, in the astral world, two beings can occupy the same space simultaneously. More has been said on this in another article.

In any case, the mythological imagination of Kronos is the father who devours his own children. This image conveys exactly the philosophical concept earlier- the pure abstraction of becoming that gives birth to everything, only to consume it once again. In this aspect, time is the manifestation of the Father’s power in its most external form. This is the Father encountered as gravity, entropy, causality, force, and such. In the natural order’s indifference to individual destiny, this relentless submission to sequence *is* the Father’s work. However, this is the Father as a kind of veiled figure, an abstract universal. Kronos knows no mercy, because he knows only the necessity of his own law. Modern science worships this power unknowingly. To be subject to this power implies an almost *slave-like* disposition, and likewise, the materialist conception of time travel, with its machine on machine manipulation, remains wholly within this dominion. It is a *rebellion* against the power of Kronos, while at the same time remaining subject to his ultimate sovereignty. Recall the prisoner metaphor; the materialist conception of time travel is almost like the prisoner mistaking the movement towards the yard for true freedom, that is, the freedom *from* something. It is doomed to be held apart from self-determination, or *true* freedom. 

The Archai represent the internal spiritual reality of time, enlightening us on its origin and purpose. In *their* domain, in the domain of spiritual realms, the past is present as an influence, and the future is the “now” which occupies the present as the determinations spirit knows. They are beings who allow for spiritual development, for the possibility that what has been bound by Kronos can be loosened. They are the powers through whom history becomes the mark of the procedural development for freedom. This is all to say that the purpose of *time*, while being seen as restrictive conditioning, is in all ways necessary for the development of freedom. 

Neither Kronos nor the Archai are ultimate. *Freedom* is ultimate. The “Father” (of which a distinction is to be made between Kronos, who is a father-figure, and the Father of the Christian Trinity) is the very subsistence of nature itself, echoing the Christian intuition that ““In Him we live and move and have our being” (Acts 17:28). It would be mistaken to view the Father as some distant legislator, setting the laws of nature in motion and then withdrawing, never to be seen again, as seen with the God of Deism. Space and time are emanations of His single, indivisible being, as one component (do not attack me for the usage here, how else should one refer to aspects of the Trinity?) of salvation. Our understanding of time is then transformed as a medium by which the Father speaks creation into being and sustains it. That is why Steiner says that “everywhere in nature is the Father”; He speaks to his creation through the mundane fact of being. To characterize Kronos as the Father misses the fact that He is not exhausted by law, He also comprises that medium of relation designated as the covenant between creator and created. 

## The possibility of “time travel”, and it’s meaning explored
So how *can* one “travel through time”? Even the phrase itself is extremely loaded. It suggests the kind of movement we have already done away with: a subject moving *through* a medium, as if it were a road, and we are just there along for the ride. If time isn’t this “container” idea explained before, but the activity of spiritual beings which create an environment conducive to freedom, and if its substance is not recognized as slavery, but an aspect of the Father’s reality He has given to us, then what we call “time travel” might be better described as “time relationship”. This would involve entering into relation with the powers that constitute time, and knowing, but not necessarily accepting, the forces which seek to bend temporal flow toward their own ends.

We have already spoken for the Archai, or the Time-Spirits, who do not move *through* time, but create it. Their relation to time is one of *agency*, specifically overseeing epochs and enabling the development of human freedom. Ahrimanic and Luciferic beings, like all spirits, do not dwell in the *present* as we do. Ahriman works from the past. His influence streams into the present from earlier ages, fixing things into rigid law and mechanism, promoting the illusion that what is determined cannot be changed. Lucifer, on the other hand, works *from the future*. He seduces one with possibilities unmoored from reality, from the now, pulling the soul toward premature spiritual heights that bypass *process*. Both seek to divert and distort the proper rhythm of time. Ahriman would freeze it into eternal repetition, Lucifer would dissolve it into formlessness. Neither has reverence for the Father, nor recognize it as necessary for the true development of man.

This all stands in stark contrast to modern fantasies of time travel. One of the more bizarre offspring of materialist thinking is “Roko’s Basilisk”, a thought experiment in which a future superintelligence punishes those who did not help bring it about, retroactively creating a motivation that reaches back through time. This is a parody of spiritual agency through an attempt to coerce the past by fear, reducing time to a deterministic chain that can be manipulated *for* a hypothetical future. What the Basilisk reveals, without knowing, is that the materialist framework necessarily *must* treat time as a thing to be exploited, since it has no place for love or freedom, the kind which binds moment to moment together. The Basilisk is in effect Kronos without the *power* of the Father, a purely devouring abstraction which only generates itself, much like the function of cancer.

We may also consider the human soul between death and a new birth. After death, the soul undergoes a reverse journey through the spheres, gradually shedding the earthly body and its attachments, memories, and such. Among the sharper minds reading this, a contradiction might present itself: if the soul is higher than the body, how then would it re-experience life? Would this not be like trying to fit an ocean into a single drop of water? The answer is quite simple. The higher “I” does not experience the sentient soul, or the part of the intellectual soul concerned with external sensory perception, only the members of the soul concerned with sense-free thinking, morality/moral ideas, art, etc., just as when the clairvoyant “thinks” as the elemental does (or perceives the spiritual being such that concept and percept are unified), they do not *become* the elemental. Similarly, the Archangel does not “see” these same aspects of the soul when looking at the human. However, the soul still experiences *time* in its perspectival reality. It looks back on the life just lived as a spatial panorama, and it prepares for a future incarnation by working with higher beings to shape the conditions of its next earthly life in accordance with it’s [karma](https://goddesscameo.github.io/p/karmas-a-@/). Does man ever “reincarnate in the past”? Not in the sense of living an earthly life earlier than its previous one. Incarnation follows a forward succession because the Earth’s own evolution has direction. But the soul between death and rebirth moves in a realm where past and future are not as they appear to us as linear opposites. It participates in a domain where the rules of spatio-temporality do not apply, where it is reversible in influence, and oriented toward the redemption of what has been. The fact that *reincarnation itself* wasn’t always a thing should provide hints relating to the procedural affectations the soul undergoes. 

It should also come as no surprise that certain forms of human perception can, under specific conditions, bypass the apparent constraints of spatiotemporality. Phenomena grouped under the names ESP and clairvoyance, such as remote viewing (which is a very sterilized form of clairvoyance for the purposes of military surveillance) and oneiromancy or prophetic dreams, all share a common feature. Space and time ceases to be a barrier. A remote viewer may describe a location *thousands* of miles away as if present, or an event from a distant century with the same immediacy as the morning’s breakfast. In these states, time does not matter since the perceiving soul has, for a moment, loosened its identification with the physical body and entered a mode of consciousness nearer to that of the astral world. One lives in time as much as one lives in space during this. A brief sidenote: the definition of death is the separation of the soul from the body, causing degeneration. While complete death is not possible, it would be irresponsible to suggest one engage in such activities. In fact, it may be the case that what is *more* conducive towards freedom involves sacrificing this capability in the name of God. Such activities are natural extensions of the perspectival nature of time. Importantly, these capacities do not grant mastery over Kronos. They are brief, fragmentary glimpses of what lies behind his immediate appearance to us.

## Christian time travel
So far, even when we recognize the relationality of time, and that human souls already participate in temporal movements beyond the linear, we confront a limit. No being, whether human, animal, or “angelic”, can simply align itself with the Father’s perspective by its own power. Kronos holds us in his grip. The Archai, for all their wisdom, are *not* the Father, they serve His order but do not bridge the gap between His infinite perspective and our finite, temporal condition. In order to be drawn into the Father’s self-relation to time, that is, to stand outside of degeneration without ceasing to be the kind of being we are, another figure is required in the picture. We require a mediator who is both fully of the Father, and fully *within time*, one whose life, death, and resurrection open a way through the binding law of nature. 

The eternal Word, the selfsame “through whom all things were made”, did not look upon His creation from the impassable summit of eternity. He entered it, taking flesh from birth, to hunger, to the slow accumulation of the years, to the stinging of crucifixion, and at last to the cold threshold of death. In this act, the Father’s perspective, which appears to us as Kronos’s grip, *itself* descends into the very sequence it ordained. Kronos, who seemed nothing but degeneration, came across Christ and his act of redemption. Christ was the one who took the past, including the sins and failures of humanity, into His own body on the cross and transformed it. The crucifixion became the axis, the fixed point by which the wheel of time turns. He is the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. In Him, the linear succession of moments is gathered into a single, presence.

When Christ says, “Do this in remembrance of me” (Luke 22:19), He is in effect instituting collapsing the conception of time which makes all things fade. We may take the Greek *anamnesis* as a word describing making something present. For instance, in the Eucharist the sacrifice of Calvary is represented as opposed to *repeated*. The offering becomes accessible to all, no matter age or congregation. This is the truest sense of “time travel”, a relationship with time involving spiritual participation in the eternal act, beyond the confines of spatiotemporality and the contingencies of nature. The Eucharist also reveals the relational nature of time as a feast, looking backwards to the cross, forward to the coming kingdom, and inward to the unity of the body of Christ. In the sacred meal, the faithful are lifted out of the degenerating current of Kronos and placed within the eternal time of the Father, mediated through the son.

The Archai, or Time-Spirits, oversee epochs and hold time open for the encroaching development of human freedom. Yet even they away fulfillment. Freedom itself requires a concrete source, and that source is Christ. In Him, the human “I” is united with the divine “I Am”. The Archai can be said to guide humanity through cultural ages. If this is the case, which it is, then Christ is the goal toward which those ages move. Hence, the Christian relationship to time *participates* in time by rightfully recognizing what time is. The believer, united to Christ shares in His resurrection, sitting with Him in heavenly places. From that vantage, the divisions of past, present, and future truly become relative. The Christian can pray for the dead with the assurance that in Christ, the boundary is permeable. He can intercede for the future with the confidence that his prayer shapes what is to come, and he can repent of the past with the certainty that all is forgiven and transformed. 

“Time travel” is finally unveiled to us as the interaction with time that finds us becoming the kind of being who can dwell in the Father’s time. What has been explained thus far is the promise of theosis. Through union with Christ, the human person who comes to share in the divine mode of existence. To “travel through time” is to be drawn into the eternal movement of love between Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, a “movement” that *generates* time, and is not bound by what it makes. It is to stand with Christ at the wedding at Cana, and at the foot of the cross, and at the empty tomb, and at the feast of the Lamb, all in one eternal now, all in one indivisibility. This is the substance of faith, and the destiny of those who are in Christ. And it is offered freely, to all who will receive it, and to all who, receiving, cease to become arrested by time. This is the true meaning of “time travel”. 
